Today's podcast is sponsored by
Datadog a monitoring platform for
cloud scale infrastructure and applications.
Datadog provides dashboarding, alerting application
performance monitoring, and log management
in one tightly integrated platform.
So you can get end
to end visibility quickly, and
it integrates with more than
350 technologies, including AWS, Postgres,
SQL, Kubernetes, and Docker. You
can visualize key metrics, set
alerts to identify anomalies and
collaborate with your team to
troubleshoot and fix issues fast.
Try it yourself by starting
a free 14 day trial
today, listeners of this podcast
will also receive a free
Datadog t-shirt visit bitly.com/data dog
shirt. That's bitly.com/datadog shirt to
get started. Hi, this is
Scott Hanselman. This is Hansel
minutes today. I'm talking with
dr. Selema on their sheet
for Microsoft research. How are
you? How are you? I
am pretty excited to talk
to you because I am
actually got some guidelines for
human AI interactions open in
my browser here. And I've
been reading this paper that
you and your team worked
on, and there was a
medium post. And I guess
this was presented at a,
at a conference recently. Yes.
At the Chi conference, which
is our conference on human
computer interaction was recently presented
there a couple of weeks
ago in Glasgow Is C
H I yes. Computer human
interaction. It's computer. Jeez. It's
our human computer interaction conference.
I think that the original
acronym is computing factors for
human interaction. Hmm. That doesn't
seem like it's very human
friendly as an applicant. No,
no. I feel like you
got me already. Human factors
and computing systems somehow came,
turned into Chi. Yeah. I
think it's more important that
you be an expert on
machine learning and not obscure
acronyms of computer conferences. It's
totally cool. But this paper
here, I know we'll, we'll
have links up in the
show notes to both the
blog and the PDF and
the paper it's in multiple
different formats. It's basically, I
wouldn't say commandments it's guidelines.
It's it's it's 18 general
rule. I don't know why
it's 18 about if you're
developing an interaction where a
human and AI are gonna
work together on something, what
are the guidelines? Why did
we need guidelines? Oh, so
many reasons we found we,
when we were working with
our product teams or product
teams were struggling to design
for AI. And that's partly
because AI systems are different
than traditional computing systems. They're
probably cystic, they make errors.
And so a of our
sort of established design principles
don't necessarily apply. And at
the same time, we had
a lot of knowledge about
how to design for AI.
But a lot of the
guidance that we knew about
was presented at all different
levels, very high level, like
established trust, but you know,
how do you actually do
that to really low level?
Like here's how you design
for this specific scenario, but
we needed something sort of
in the middle that could
help our design practitioners create
new interfaces and you interaction
techniques. When you say that
our existing guidelines don't apply,
is it because they are
incorrect guidelines or because they
simply don't exist because this
is a new world that
we're entering, They exist and
they're not incorrect. In fact,
we think of the human
AI interaction guidelines as complimentary
to traditional guidelines. It's just
that there are some characteristics
of AI systems that make
it challenging to adhere to
traditional guidelines. So for example,
a traditional user experience guideline
is to make our interfaces
consistent and predictable, but AI
systems are probabilistic. They operate
under uncertainty. And so that
means that they might behave
differently in subtly different contexts,
or they might behave differently
after a model updates. And
so that unpredictability can make
it hard for end users
to understand how to, how
to interact and use an
AI system effectively. It's a
really neat sort of new
guidelines to, to deal with
those sort of properties of
AI systems that don't exist
with traditional computer. I feel
like there's, there are people
who are somewhat technical like
myself, and then somewhat non
technical. Like my, like my
spouse, the more nontechnical people
are, they seem to ascribe
intent to an AI. If
it does something unexpected, if
it makes a mistake, or
if it a recently we
were doing a thing with
a, with a competitive photos
album and it identified two
people as being the same
person. Right. And they're not
the same person. They're not
even the same gender. They're
I even not close to
the same person. And someone
said, well, that's, that's, that's
that AI is, is racist.
Right. I was like, Whoa,
like, I mean, yeah, there's
all like, that's such a,
that's such a conversation that
right there, like you, you
just ascribed intent to this
thing and there's 50 reasons
why it could, it still
might be racist, but why
that thing could have happened,
but then you don't want
to, as a technical person,
well, actually the person that
you're hanging out with at
Thanksgiving dinner, who now says
that this AI has racist
and they don't want to
use the photo album anymore.
Yes. You know, I definitely
don't think companies are trying
to create racist, AIS. I
think that's sort of a
product of how AIS are
built. You know, they're based
on data that's collected and
it's hard to get really
diverse data sets. Just, just
collecting data is, is, is
very difficult. And so part
of the, what happens is
that when, when you don't
have really diverse, broad data
sets, you can get these
properties of AI sort of
behaving inappropriately for certain scenarios.
And that's, that's where the
problems occur. And I think
the, where the guidelines can
help is in recognizing that
AIS will make mistakes. You
know, it's like, I think
it's very rare that an
AI will be perfect and
we need to sort of
stop, stop thinking about them
as trying to be perfect
and recognize that they will
make mistakes and then give
users tools to mitigate those
mistakes when they happen. Exactly.
And that brings us to
the first two rules of
your guidelines for human AI
interaction, make it clear what
the system can do and
make it clear how well
it can do what it
does. And honestly, we're only
two rules in, and I
don't think I've ever seen
anything ever do that in
my interaction with AI, whether
it be the photos app,
it's never like, hi, welcome
to the photos app. We're
probably going to think that
your aunt is your dog
and that your dog is
your neighbor. And we're sorry.
And click here. When that
happens. That's never happened to
me. Yes. I think there,
there, there are some products
that do this, but we're
still learning like there's many
ways you can implement any
of these guidelines. So some
ways that I've seen this
being done are like, so
for the first guideline, making
clear what the system can
do, some of our applications
will give examples of what
it can handle. So Cortana,
for example, can suggest, here
are some of the commands
that I understand, right. That
can give the user some
understanding of what the AI
can do well, but there
are other ways that we
might design implement that guideline.
And I think that's where
new re we need new
research or like, what are,
what are the multiple different
ways that we can possibly
implement that in any other
guidelines? You say new research,
forgive me, because I'm not
a researcher, I'm a, I'm
a more of a dev,
what is the difference between
a researcher like, and someone
just coming up with these
guidelines on their own, like,
why are your 18 guidelines
better than one that I
might just make up? So
ours are really a synthesis
of AI design guidance that
was coming out of the
community for the past 20
years. So, you know, I
wouldn't even say, it's not
like we made these up.
We wanted to consolidate all
sort of the guidance that
was coming out of both
like the practitioner community, as
well as the research community.
And part of the issue
was that a lot of
guidance was, was being produced,
but it was very scattered
and it was hard to
find guidance was presented at
different altitudes. And so even
though we sort of have
a lot of knowledge about
how to design human AI
interaction, we were seeing a
lot of like sort of
redundancy and people trying to
figure out the same things
that we, we sort of
discovered sometimes many years ago.
And so really this is
like a consolidation of all
of that. And in the
process of consolidating, we also
iterated on the guidelines multiple
times and validated them. So
we could ensure that they
were clear and that they
were applicable to a broad
range of AI product. Hmm.
That's a good point. Yeah.
Yeah. I feel like that's
sort of the difference. I
think a lot of the
guidance that's coming out are
sort of hypotheses that people
have that maybe were only
tested in one or two
scenarios. These we know are
relevant to a wide range
of scenarios. So in that
sense they can, they're trustworthy.
I noticed that there's nothing,
like I thought when we
were, when I was reading
this, it was going to
be application specific. And then
I got halfway through and
then I thought it'd be
Alexa or Cortana specific or
a voice assistant, but it's
not it's it's anything, it
could be AI in a
GPS app. It could be
AI where something interrupts you.
It could be just a
dialogue box that pops up
is this, these are guidelines
that are really about the
interaction, but not specific to
the interaction model. Yes. Yeah.
And we were intentional about
that. We wanted them to
be broadly applicable to a
range of scenarios. And so
in our process of consolidating,
we, we actually collected over
150 design recommendations about AI.
So there is a lot
of guidance around this, but
we filtered out guidance that
was very specific to particular
applications. Cause we, we wanted
to, we wanted a set
that could apply to a
range of them. So that's,
that's how we came up
with these. But we imagine
that there could be application,
additional application, specific guidance that
also might help in certain
scenarios for bots, for example,
you might need additional guidance
to support that specific scenario.
I see. So someone could
theoretically take these and go
off and make the best
guidance for music recommenders or
for e-commerce systems that are
a, a more specific version
of this with examples. Yeah.
I believe you could. I
would just caution against try,
starting from scratch. Like I
would think about like, what
do you need to do
for a music recommender and
go back to these and
other guidance available and see
if they're covered in this.
Because I think part of
what we want to do
is we want to accelerate
our progress in how to
design human AI interaction. And
I think creating clarity about
what do we know already
can help and that also
can help us know what
we don't know, so that
we can create guidance in,
in that specific, you know,
gap in our knowledge. And
you went and you validated
these guidelines. So when you
say research, you're talking about
multiple rounds of validation with
both human computer interaction, experts,
UX people, basically until those
experts agreed that these are
clear and specific and of
high quality. Exactly. Yeah. We
had a 49 user experience
practitioners from across Microsoft. We
had them, you know, we
train them about the guidelines.
We had them tests about
20 different products and, you
know, they, they gave us
feedback, they collect it, they
gave us examples. So we
actually collected like over 700
examples of how to apply
the diff the guidelines and
those itself actually are, are
really valuable just cause they,
they make it concrete. You
know? Like how, how do
you make clear what the
system can do? You know,
how do, how do you
support efficient invocation? We found
that the, the examples themselves
can, can really help practitioners
understand how to implement these.
Yeah. Even the papers only
the one I'm reading is
only a 20 pages long
and it's definitely worth reading
and people should check it
out. I'll make sure to
have a link in the
show notes. One of the
things that I appreciated the
most about this, and I
don't spend a whole lot
of time reading papers of
this kind of, you know,
academic or erudite kind of
style. But I found it
really useful because it was
organized in, it was organized
temporarily. Like they're not just
in order, like you just
didn't number them. You've got
initially when you start interacting
with an AI, then during
the interaction, when the interaction
goes wrong. And then as
you build a relationship for
lack of a better word
with the AI in ordering
them in that way, it
felt, it felt really natural
for, for me as I
would go out and kind
of think about how my
applications behave. Great. Yeah. We,
I mean, we had, we
ended up with 18 of
them at the end and
you know, it was a
lot to digest. And so
I would call these rough
rough groupings to sort of
make it more digestible. But
in some sense, you know,
the, when wrong category that
happens during interaction as well,
but at least this way,
it's, it can make them
somewhat memorable and help our
practitioners understand that, Hey, there
are these different stages of
people interacting with our AI
systems and we have to
sort of design for all
of them. Hey, friends, as
a software engineer, chances are
you've paths with Mongo DB.
At some point, whether you're
building an app for millions
of users, or just figuring
out your side hustle as
the most popular non-relational database,
Mongo DB is intuitive and
incredibly easy for development teams
to use. Now with Mongo
DB Atlas, you can take
advantage of Mongo DBS, flexible
document data model as a
fully automated cloud service. Mongo
DB Atlas handles all the
costly database operations and admin
tasks that you'd rather not
spend time on like security,
high availability, data, recovery monitoring,
and elastic scaling. Try Mongo
DB Atlas for free today.
Visit Mongo db.com/cloud that's Mongo
db.com/cloud to learn more. One
of the things that I
thought was interesting was match
relevant, social norms. That's number,
number five. Does, does Cortana
or Siri or Alexa behave
very different. I've never heard
it in another language or
in another country. Are there
social norms about how I'm
supposed to interact with my,
I don't know if I
think of Alexa as my
Butler or my secretary or
my, my man Friday. Like,
I'm not sure who this
person is or what my
social norms is. And I
wonder if, if Alexa in
Japan is very different than
Cortana in China. That is
a great question. I I'm
not, and I don't know
the answer. I think there
are cultural differences that need
to be taken into consideration.
And in fact, this was
one of the hardest guidelines
for our practitioners to test.
It's sort of, it depends
on who your target users
are and, and, and whether
you're trying to appeal to
a specific user or a
broad range of users, but
even, you know, just like
the think about like the
voice, you know, are you
using a male or female
voice, you know, is that
appropriate for the cultural context?
And, you know, having giving
people choices about like changing
the voice, what is another
thing that we've seen as
an example of how to
match relevant social norms? It's
not just like making Alexa
or Cortana talk in, in
one voice, allowing people to,
to change that. So they,
it can, it can better
match their, their cultural norms.
And it also affects our
kind of our cultural norms.
My wife was telling me
just a couple of days
ago that she didn't understand
why Alexa was a woman.
And if that was kind
of getting to the women
as, as secretary or assistant
thing, and it was like,
it's 2019 here, we have
these amazing AI's that are
ever present and we can
always ask them questions, but
it happens to be a
woman's voice. Could it be
gender Newt and a gender,
non gender specific voice? Is
there a such thing, Right?
Yes. And I think those
are questions. We, we want
answered some of what we,
when we, when we studied
these, we had our participants
give us examples of what,
how they were being applied
or violated, but we still
don't really know what is
the best way to achieve
any of the guidelines. Like
I said, there are multiple
ways to achieve it. And
I think that sort of
goes back to, you know,
what is a research question
that, that we can, you
know, try to address? Like
what, what, what our research
questions that these guidelines are
reveal. And one of them
is that, you know, like
what are good ways of
implementing how to match relevant
social norms, such that, you
know, people are such, that
people are, you know, happy
and find that their AI's
are intuitive and, and, you
know, responsible and ethical. Yeah.
And how, how would you
test that? And if you
tested it now, or then
in five years, or in
10 years, would the test
change? I mean, these AI's
and our interactions with them,
how I would interact with
an Alexa today would be
different than how one of
the characters on mad men
would interact with their theoretical
AI in the past. Right?
And I think one of
the ways that we can
actually try to test for
these, particularly that guideline and
mitigating social biases is to
get a diverse set of
testers. So one example that
comes to mind that came
out of our study was
we had one of our
participants. We had a couple
of tough participants testing navigation
systems, and one of the
participants said, you know, Hey,
this navigation system, it can't
be biased. There's nothing it
can do. That's that's biasing.
Whereas another participant said, Hey,
this navigation system assumes that
I'm a healthy individual. When
it's giving me walking times
to get to where I'm
going. And I thought that
was really interesting because, you
know, it demonstrates that having
a diverse set of people
helps to reveal when there
are biases in a system
or when an AI is
violating social norms. It's hard
for people to sort of
assess an AI system for,
for, you know, cultures and
social contexts that they're not
part of. And so diverse
sets of testers can help
there. That is a really
good one. I like to
think of myself as, at,
at the very least waking
up and I would not
have even thought about that.
And now I'm going to
think about it every time
I go to a GPS
and it says, yeah, you
can walk that in, in
10 minutes, because if you're
in a wheelchair, I don't
even know if there's stairs
or if the GPS knows
that there's stairs. I was
making my way through a,
a subway system in Europe
recently. And I was working
at a pretty quick, I
was walking pretty fast, but
even with my bags, I
missed a couple of trains,
if you could, and you
could solve that by going
and putting a waiting, like
I walk half speed, or
I have a Walker or
whatever, and you could improve
the experience for everyone. Not
just people who are differently
abled. Exactly. One of the
other ones that I really
liked was this, make it
clear why the system did
what it did. I can't
remember the time when my
GPS told me why it
picked the fastest route. It
just told me go this
way. Yeah. So that's, that's
an interesting one in our
studies. That was actually one
of the guidelines that was
probably violated the most in
the sense that, so when
I say violation, I mean,
people are participants thought it
should apply, but it wasn't
enabled in the systems that
they were testing. And I
think part of the reason
for that is that we
just don't know how to
do this very well yet.
You know, AI systems are,
are complex and they're hard
to, to describe. And that's
why there's like a whole
communities now around interpretable AI
and machine learning in order
to come up with ways
of explaining these complex systems
to people. So there's a
lot of research going on
to try to enable this
guideline. Do we understand how
they do what they do?
Like I hear about deep
learning and different kinds of
machine learning algorithms. And sometimes
people say, well, I don't
know, like we trained it.
And this is why, you
know, it just, this is
what it does. How much
insight do we have into
the leaps of logic that
these systems make, where we
could even tell it, tell
the user why in a,
in a way that would
be understandable by the lay
person? I think it's, I
think it's depends on the
model. Some models are more
sort of interpretable than others.
You know, like decision trees,
for example, might be more
interpretable than deep learning, deep
learning models. So it depends
on the models you use.
A lot of the AIS
we have now are using
sort of more complex modeling
models and algorithms, and that's,
what's making it difficult. Really
those models are, you can
think of like an AI
system as our machine learning
model as a combination of
data and an algorithm. And
so what's resulting in that
model is the data that
you've trained the algorithm to
recognize patterns within. So in
that sense, it's often hard
to explain why a predict
a system, a model is
making a prediction, you know,
is it because the data
that was trained on was
inadequate, maybe the features that
were representing the data's inadequate?
Is it something about the
algorithm? You, it's hard to
sort of pinpoint why I'm
an AI will make a
decision that it did, and
that there's a lot of
research now help try to
help people debug AI systems
for that reason as well.
So I think it's just
an open problem. I think
people are trying to get
there, but we're just not
there yet. Yeah. And if
you want to abide by
these guidelines and follow them,
there's other ones like, you
know, farther into the, into
the paper here, like convey
the consequences of user actions.
You know, I may or
may not be able to
really effectively do that if
I'm not a hundred percent
sure how my system works,
because I don't know what
the check box that you
just checked or the button
you just pressed is going
to do in the future.
Yes. So that one, that
one really bugs me as
someone who's sort of familiar
with like AI systems. I,
I don't really trust like
that. They will learn what
I want. So I don't
provide a lot of ratings
to on my, you know,
in Netflix or Pandora. I'm
sorry. I sort of hesitant,
I'm hesitant to, you know,
give thumbs up or thumbs
down in those scenarios because
I'm not sure what it's
gonna learn from me. And
so that's part of partly
because yeah, I'm not sure
what the model is. What
features are, is it monitoring?
What signals is it monitoring?
Like what is going to
happen to the model? What
are what's, what are my
new recommendations going to be
if I like this, versus
if I not like this.
And so giving people some
insight into the consequences of
their actions could help with
helped me in that sense,
That's a challenging one, because
one of your guidelines is
learn from user behavior. Right.
But, but then you get
into things like one of
the controversies around Netflix right
now is they have been
trying, they've been auto generating
the titles, like the, the,
what do you call it?
Like the, the video tape
boxes, right? The little thumbnails
that say, this is a
show and they're putting different
faces on the, on the
things to me to see
if you click on them
and you see where this
is going. Right. So one
of the, one of the
things that happened recently is
they've been putting a number
of black folks on Twitter,
felt upset because they saw
a new show that they'd
never heard of with a
black person on the front
and they click on it.
And that person has a
secondary, or maybe even just
a single scene. And the,
it feels like you've been
like, told that your favorite
character actor, isn't a show,
but they're really not. They're
like in one scene in
one episode of the show
and it's because, Oh, we
have learned that you like
watching shows with black stars.
Therefore there's a black person
in this. So we'll dig
them up out of IMD
DB, auto-generate a title screen,
and then you'll click on
it and watch that show,
Right? Yes. So I think
learning, you have, do you
have to, you have to
implement these guidelines very carefully
and think about your specific
scenario. I think learning the
guidelines 13 learning from user
behavior often goes hand in
hand with number, which is
what we call encouraging granular
feedback, which is basically saying,
allow the user to steer
the AI. So if you're
going to learn, still allow
the user to steer it
in the right direction so
that they can have more
control about how, what the
AI, the behaviors of the
AI system. And that also
like gets me to another
thing I'd want to emphasize
is that the guidelines aren't
a checklist. Like we, some
they're not all going to
apply to every scenario. And
so there's going to need
to, you're going to have
to make trade offs if
you're going to implement them.
And it's very scenario dependent.
So really we want people
to look at the guidelines
and think about them intentionally
and make decisions about whether
or not to apply them
in any given scenario. Yeah.
It's definitely not a checklist
because even in thinking of
this Netflix one, we're going
well, but then make it
clear why the system did
what it did. But I
also want to remember recent
interactions mitigate social biases, and
you're going to find yourself
going around and around, but
it certainly inspires discussion. And
it's a great place to
start if you're building any
kind of an interaction system
using AI. Exactly. And that
we're, we're really interested in
that going forwards. You know,
how can the guidelines be
used at, you know, the,
the initially when you're starting
to build an AI product,
can it like, you know,
encourage design teams and modeling
teams to come together and
discuss how they should design
AI systems and what their
AI should support, you know,
kind of facilitate that discussion.
So you can sort of
avoid some common pitfalls and
create intuitive experiences. Fantastic. Thank
you so much for chatting
with me. No problem. Thanks
for having me. I've been
talking with dr. Shaleema omarisha,
she's a researcher in the
adaptive systems and interaction group
at Microsoft research. And this
has been another episode of
Hansel minutes, and we'll see
you again next week. .